♪
THE ENVIRONMENT
IS DETERIORATING.
THIS IS SOMETHING
FEW PEOPLE DOUBT.
THE EARTH, THE AIR AND
THE SEA ON OUR PLANET
ARE SUFFERING AN
ACCELERATED DEGRADATION
OF UNPREDICTABLE
CONSEQUENCES.
HOWEVER, IS THIS A
HOMOGENEOUS PROCESS?
DOES THE ENVIRONMENT
IN MALI, FOR EXAMPLE,
DETERIORATE IN THE SAME
WAY AND AT THE SAME PACE
AS IT DOES IN CHICAGO?
WILL PEOPLE IN THE
UNITED STATES SUFFER
THE CONSEQUENCES OF
ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
IN THE SAME WAY THAT
PEOPLE IN CAMBODIA DO?
NO. THIRD WORLD
COUNTRIES ARE AT THE
TOP OF THE LIST WHEN
IT COMES TO THE MISERY
CREATED BY
UNCONTROLLED PROGRESS.
THE CONSEQUENCES OF
UNSCRUPULOUS DEVELOPMENT
UNCHECKED BY PRAGMATIC
FORWARD-LOOKING PLANNING,
ARE CONVERTING THE POOREST
POPULATIONS ON THE PLANET
INTO UNWITTING
GUARDIANS OF THE
GREAT GLOBAL DUMPSTER
OF PLANET EARTH.
WHILE THE INDUSTRIAL
REVOLUTION HAS
UNQUESTIONABLY INCREASED
MANKIND'S MATERIAL
PROGRESS, IT HAS ALSO
HAD ITS DOWN SIDE.
WHAT DO WE DO WITH ALL THE
JUNK, THE SCRAP METAL,
REFUSE AND PLETHORA
OF CAUSTIC BYPRODUCTS
OUR INDUSTRIOUSNESS
ALSO RENDERS?
NOT MANY PEOPLE WORRIED
ABOUT THIS AT FIRST.
EARTH SEEMED INFINITE,
MORE THAN CAPABLE OF
COPING WITH A LITTLE
DETRITUS HERE AND THERE
AND A BIT OF SOOT.
BUT OF COURSE WE NOW KNOW
THAT OUR BELOVED PLANET
IS NOT AS INDESTRUCTIBLE
AS WE THOUGHT IT WAS.
MANAGING THE DESTRUCTIVE
EFFECTS OF HUMAN ACTIVITY
AND THE ACCUMULATION
OF WASTE PRODUCTS
IS NO LONGER CONSIDERED
JUST A SILLY ANECDOTE.
IN THE 20TH CENTURY, THE
CHEMICAL, STEEL AND NAVAL
INDUSTRIES, TO NAME BUT A
FEW, BECAME SO PERVASIVELY
LARGE AND INDISPENSABLE
THAT THE NATURE
AND SHEER QUANTITY
OF THEIR WASTE PRODUCTS
COULD HARDLY
BE IGNORED.
HOW WOULD THIS THORNY
ISSUE BE MANAGED?
IN THE END THE SOLUTION
SEEMED SIMPLE.
SELL THE GARBAGE
TO SOMEBODY ELSE.
AFTER ALL, THERE
ARE LOTS OF COUNTRIES
BETWEEN A ROCK AND A
HARD PLACE THAT WOULD
GLADLY TAKE YOUR
CASH AND YOUR JUNK.
WHICH IS PERFECTLY
FINE, OF COURSE,
FOR THAT'S THE WAY
THE WORLD GOES ROUND.
A PERFECTLY LEGITIMATE
BUSINESS DEAL,
CAVEAT EMPTOR.
HOWEVER, THIS PARTICULAR
KIND OF BUSINESS SOMETIMES
GETS MORE COMPLICATED,
DISTURBING EVEN,
FOR WHEN THE WASTE PRODUCTS
IN QUESTION INCLUDE
CERTAIN CHEMICAL
PRODUCTS OR TOXIC WASTE,
SUDDENLY INNOCENT PEOPLES'
LIVES ARE PUT AT RISK.
IT'S WELL DOCUMENTED THAT
MANY POTENTIALLY HARMFUL
INDUSTRIAL BYPRODUCTS ARE
REGULARLY TRANSPORTED,
CHEMICALLY TREATED,
AND STORED UNDER
REMARKABLY LAX
SECURITY CONDITIONS.
AND THIS DESPITE THE FACT
THAT HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF AFRICANS AND ASIANS
HAVE SUFFERED DISEASE
AND DEATH AS A
DIRECT RESULT OF
CURRENT GLOBAL
INDUSTRIAL WASTE POLICY.
IT'S A STATUS QUO THAT
IS SOLIDLY UNDERPINNED
BY INTERNATIONAL LAW
AND THINGS ARE ONLY
GETTING WORSE
DECADE BY DECADE.
OVER 130 MILLION CELL
PHONES ARE SIMPLY
THROWN AWAY EVERY YEAR
JUST IN THE UNITED STATES.
BY 2007 THERE WILL BE 700
MILLION OBSOLETE COMPUTERS.
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF REFRIGERATORS,
AIR CONDITIONERS, TAPE
DECKS, AND ALL KINDS OF
OTHER HOUSEHOLD
APPLIANCES ARE DISCARDED
EVERY SINGLE DAY
AROUND THE GLOBE.
WHEN SOMEONE THROWS OUT
AN OLD COMPUTER OR CELL
PHONE, DIGITAL CAMERA,
ELECTRONIC DATE BOOK, ETC,
HEAVY METALS LIKE LEAD,
MERCURY AND CADMIUM
GO ALONG FOR THE RIDE.
IF NOT PROPERLY TREATED,
COMPONENT MATERIALS
OF THIS TYPE POSE VERY
SERIOUS PUBLIC HEALTH
AND ENVIRONMENTAL
ISSUES.
COMPUTER SCREENS,
FOR EXAMPLE,
CONTAIN PARTICULARLY
LARGE AMOUNTS OF LEAD.
IN EUROPE, AS IN THE
UNITED STATES, 80% OF
ALL ELECTRONIC WASTE IS
SHIPPED OFF TO AFRICA
OR ASIA TO BE DISMANTLED
AND FURTHER TREATED.
OFTEN SIMPLY BURNED IN
OPEN AIR PITS OR THROWN
INTO ACID BATHS WHOSE
RUNOFF THEN POLLUTES
RICE FIELDS AND
RIVERS THAT PROVIDE
DRINKING WATER
TO RURAL AREAS.
THESE INAPPROPRIATE REFUSE
TREATMENT PRACTICES
HAVE BEEN SHOWN TO CAUSE
RESPIRATORY AND STOMACH
DISEASES THAT RESULT
IN CHRONIC SUFFERING
FOR VICTIMS
AND EVEN DEATH.
A GREAT NUMBER OF WORKERS
EMPLOYED IN THESE KINDS
OF JOBS IN POOR COUNTRIES
ARE WOMEN AND CHILDREN
WHOSE HANDS ARE
QUICKER AND CHEAPER.
THE AMOUNT OF WASTE
THAT IS TRANSPORTED TO
THIRD WORLD COUNTRIES
IS INCREASING AT SUCH A
HIGH RATE THAT
THE EUROPEAN UNION
HAS EFFECTIVELY
BANNED THE TRAFFIC.
BUT THIS DOESN'T
MEAN THAT IT STOPPED.
ON THE CONTRARY, IT HAS
CONTINUED TO INCREASE.
COMPANIES DON'T SEND
THEIR WASTE PRODUCTS,
FOR EXAMPLE, TO BE
ELIMINATED ANYMORE
BUT TO BE RECYCLED.
OFFICIALLY SPEAKING, SUCH
PRODUCTS ARE EXPORTED
SO THEIR BASE COMPONENTS
AND TRACE ELEMENTS
CAN BE RECOVERED.
HOWEVER, IN FACT, THIS
IS AN ERSATZ RECYCLING
PROCESS, FOR THIS
REFUSE IS ACTUALLY
SIMPLY INCINERATED OR
BURIED JUST LIKE BEFORE.
A CLASSIC EXAMPLE OF THIS
IS HOW SHIPPING VESSELS
ARE SCRAPPED.
MOST OF THEM ARE 80%
STEEL WHICH CAN BE SOLD
AND RE-USED AS SCRAP
METAL WHILE OTHER
MORE VALUABLE COMPONENTS
CAN ALSO BE RECYCLED.
BUT AN OLD MEDIUM SIZED
SHIP, FOR EXAMPLE,
ALSO CONTAINS NEARLY
5% TOXIC COMPONENTS
REQUIRING SOPHISTICATED
WASTE TREATMENT.
THIS SITUATION ON A
GLOBAL SCALE CONSTITUTES
A VERY DANGEROUS
SOURCE OF TOXIC WASTE.
VESSELS ARE OFTEN SCRAPPED
ON BEACHES OR NEAR
RIVERBANKS AND SPILL
THEIR TOXIC SUBSTANCES
ON THE GROUND
AND IN THE SEA.
THIS INDUSTRY IS
CONSIDERED ONE OF THE
DEADLIEST IN
THE WORLD.
WORKERS DISMANTLE SHIPS
WITH THEIR BARE HANDS
AND SOME 25% OF
THEM WILL GET CANCER
FROM BREATHING
ASBESTOS DUST.
OVER 100,000 WORKERS
DISMANTLING OLD SHIPS
IN ASIA ALONE ARE DIRECTLY
EXPOSED TO SUCH POISONS.
COMMUNITIES LIVING NEARBY
THESE FALSE RECYCLING
FACILITIES ARE ALSO
AFFECTED BY THE POLLUTION
AND DISEASES CAUSED BY
EXPOSURE TO TOXIC SUBSTANCES.
IN THE YEAR 2002, THE
BASEL CONVENTION ADOPTED
CERTAIN DIRECTIVES
IN WHICH SUITABLE
PROCEDURES AND
PRACTICES WERE DETAILED
REGARDING THE
DECOMMISSIONING
AND SCRAPPING OF
OBSOLETE VESSELS.
THE DIRECTIVES
DISCUSS DISMANTLING,
THE CLASSIFICATION OF PARTS,
THE IDENTIFICATION
OF ANY POSSIBLE
CONTAMINATING ELEMENTS
AND THE PREVENTION
OF TOXIC SPILLS,
BUT IT'S A NON
BINDING DOCUMENT.
ITS DIRECTIVES ARE
SIMPLY GUIDELINES.
IN 2003, THE INTERNATIONAL
LABOR ORGANIZATION
AGREED ON CERTAIN
GUIDELINES
HAVING TO DO WITH
WORKING CONDITIONS
DURING THE DISMANTLING
OF OBSOLETE VESSELS,
AND THESE TOO
ARE SIMPLY VOLUNTARY.
AS ONE MIGHT
EXPECT, NEITHER THE
BASEL CONVENTION
OR THE ILO RULES
CAN BOAST OF ANY
COMPLIANCE TO SPEAK OF.
TRANS-NATIONAL COMPANIES
MAY ACT ONE WAY OR ANOTHER
DEPENDING ON WHETHER
THEY'RE DEALING WITH A
DEVELOPED COUNTRY WITH
STRICT ENVIRONMENTAL AND
HEALTHCARE PROTECTION
RULES OR WITH A DEVELOPING
COUNTRY WITH NO PROTECTION
IN THIS AREA WHATSOEVER.
THERE ARE HUNDREDS OF
KNOWN CASES OVER THE LAST
FEW YEARS IN WHICH
COMPANIES HAVE INFLICTED
GREAT HARM IN DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES AND HAVEN'T BEEN
MADE TO PAY THE
CONSEQUENCES YET.
IN SOUTH AFRICA, FOR
EXAMPLE, THOR CHEMICALS,
THIS COMPANY CLOSED ITS
ASBESTOS FACTORIES IN THE
UNITED KINGDOM BY WAY OF
LEGAL MEDIATION FROM THE
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH,
SOCIAL SERVICES
AND PUBLIC SAFETY.
HOWEVER, IT CONTINUED
TO WORK AT ITS
SOUTH AFRICAN FACTORY
FOR 20 YEARS MORE,
CAUSING MANY CASES OF
DISEASE AND/OR DEATH
AND SERIOUS DAMAGE
TO THE ENVIRONMENT.
IN THIS CASE, AS
IN SO MANY OTHERS,
THE COMPANY ANSWERS ONLY
TO ITS SHAREHOLDERS.
THE SHAREHOLDERS IN
TURN JUDGE A COMPANY'S
ACCOMPLISHMENTS BY
ITS FINANCIAL HEALTH
AND RETURNS
OF DIVIDENDS.
IN SHORT, THERE ARE NO
EFFECTIVE LAWS THAT CAN
ASSURE A MINIMUM OF
ETHICAL CONSIDERATION
TOWARDS PEOPLE AND THE
ENVIRONMENT IN REGIONS
SO FAR REMOVED FROM THE
RESIDENCES OF BOTH THE
SHAREHOLDERS AND THE
COMPANY EXECUTIVES
RESPONSIBLE FOR
THIS SITUATION.
REGARDING THE TRANSPORTING
OF WASTE PRODUCTS,
IT'S IMPORTANT TO NOTE
THAT THE AREAS EVENTUALLY
AFFECTED ARE ALMOST
ALWAYS DISINHERITED ONES.
THE PEOPLE AFFECTED
ARE ALMOST ALWAYS
THE LEAST AWARE OF
THE RISKS THEY RUN
AND THE RIGHTS
THEY MAY HAVE.
FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS,
GENERALLY ACCEPTED FOR
ALL HUMAN BEINGS, ARE
CLEARLY PUT AT STAKE.
THE RIGHT TO LIFE, HEALTH,
PROPER NOURISHMENT,
DECENT WORKING
CONDITIONS, ETC.
IF WE CONTINUE TO
ACCEPT THE STATUS QUO,
BE ACCOMPLICES,
AREN'T WE ALL RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE CONSEQUENCES?
THE USE OF CHEMICAL
PRODUCTS HAS INCREASED
OVER THE LAST
FEW DECADES.
THE CHEMICAL INDUSTRY
CONSTITUTES A VERY
IMPORTANT PART OF
THE GLOBAL ECONOMY -
SOME 9% OF ALL
INTERNATIONAL COMMERCE.
80% OF THIS INDUSTRY'S
PRODUCTS ARE PRODUCED IN
INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
WHILE NO LESS THAN 90% OF
THE RESULTING DANGEROUS
RESIDUES END UP IN
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
WHICH ARE ESSENTIALLY
RURAL AND INHABITED
BY THE COMMUNITIES
MOST UNPREPARED TO COPE
WITH THE OFTEN PERILOUS
CONSEQUENCES OF SUCH ONE
SIDED INDUSTRIAL TRANSFER.
WITHIN THE
CHEMICAL INDUSTRY
PESTICIDES CONTINUE TO BE
THE MOST DANGEROUS PRODUCTS
- THOSE WITH THE
POTENTIAL TO CAUSE
INTOXICATIONS ON
AN EPIDEMIC SCALE.
EACH YEAR THERE ARE THREE
MILLION RECORDED CASES
OF PEOPLE SUFFERING
SEVERE INTOXICATION
FROM PESTICIDES, OF
WHICH 200,000 DIE.
99% OF THESE CASES
ARE RECORDED IN
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.
WHY?
BECAUSE, FOR EXAMPLE,
BETWEEN 1997 AND 2000
THE UNITED STATES
EXPORTED MILLIONS
OF KILOS OF
PESTICIDAL PRODUCTS,
MOST OF WHICH WERE
BANNED IN AMERICA.
WHERE DID THOSE 30
MILLION KILOS END UP?
IN PLACES LIKE SOUTH
AMERICA, AFRICA AND ASIA.
IN THE YEAR 2000 THE
MINISTRY OF HEALTH OF
BRAZIL ESTIMATED THAT
THE COUNTRY HAD RECORDED
300,000 ANNUAL CASES
OF INTOXICATION
AND 5,000 DEATHS CAUSED
BY BANNED PESTICIDES.
ACCORDING TO AN INDONESIAN
STUDY, 21% OF THE
FUMIGATION OPERATIONS
CARRIED OUT IN THAT
VAST ISLAND NATION HAD
CAUSED CASES OF NERVE,
LUNG OR INTESTINAL
PROBLEMS.
A UNITED NATIONS SURVEY
POINTED OUT THAT NO LESS
THAN 88% OF ALL CAMBODIAN
FARMERS USING PESTICIDES
SHOW SYMPTOMS OF
INTOXICATION.
IN AFRICA, WOMEN AND
CHILDREN PRODUCE 80% OF
THE FOOD SUPPLY AND THUS
ARE EXPOSED TO PESTICIDES
ON AN INCREASING SCALE.
IT HAS BEEN NOTED THAT
THERE ARE SOME 120,000 TONS
OF OBSOLETE PESTICIDES
STORED ON THAT CONTINENT.
IN SITUATIONS LIKE THESE
THE LAW ITSELF OFTEN ACTS
AS AN ACCOMPLICE TO
POLLUTING COMPANIES.
VULNERABLE COMMUNITY
GROUPS AREN'T CAPABLE OF
TAKING EFFECTIVE
PROTECTIVE MEASURES
OR OF OBTAINING
PROPER LEGAL SUPPORT.
IN THE RARE CASES IN WHICH
THREATENED COMMUNITIES
HAVE MANAGED TO PRESS
CHARGES, COMPANIES HAVE
BEEN ABLE TO DELAY THE
LEGAL PROCESS INDEFINITELY
BY SEEKING PROTECTION
UNDER OBSCURE LAWS OR
SIMPLY BY BRIBING JUDGES
AND DISTRICT ATTORNEYS.
THE EUROPEAN COMMISSION
HAS DEMANDED THAT CERTAIN
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS
CHEMICAL SUBSTANCES BE
CLASSIFIED AS "OF COMMUNAL
CONCERN" BUT NOT BANNED.
THE COMMISSION MERELY
AIMS TO ASK EXPORTERS TO
EXERCISE PROPER CONTROL
OVER THEIR USE WITHOUT
SPECIFYING WHAT "PROPER
CONTROL" MIGHT MEAN.
WE STILL CAN'T PREDICT
WHEN AN EARTHQUAKE
WILL OCCUR OR
PREVENT THE FORMATION
OF A DEVASTATING
HURRICANE.
OF COURSE WE KNOW THAT
GREAT FLOODS HAVE
CERTAINLY EXISTED SINCE
THE DAWN OF TIME
AND THAT THERE EXIST
TALES FROM ANCIENT
AFRICAN BARDS
EVOKING THE DEATHS OF
THOUSANDS OF ANCIENT
PEOPLE IN DROUGHTS
PROVOKED BY THE
FURY OF THE GODS.
SURELY NATURE HAS ALWAYS
MARKED ITS TERRITORY,
HAS ALWAYS STIRRED UNEASILY,
ALWAYS FLOODED CROPS
AND PROVOKED DISASTERS,
MIGRATIONS AND STARVATION.
HOWEVER, RECENT STUDIES AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH
CAROLINA SUGGEST VERY
STRONGLY THAT OVER THE
LAST 40 YEARS BOTH THE
FREQUENCY AND MAGNITUDE OF
NATURAL DISASTERS HAVE
INCREASED PROGRESSIVELY.
FLOODS AND
EARTHQUAKES ARE NOW
NINE TIMES
MORE FREQUENT,
THEIR CONSEQUENCES
NINE TIMES WORSE.
IN SPITE OF THE
TECHNOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT
OUR CIVILIZATION HAS
EXPERIENCED OVER THE
SECOND HALF OF THE 20TH
CENTURY, WE HAVEN'T REALLY
BEEN ABLE TO ADAPT MUCH OF
IT TO PREVENTING RISKS.
ESPECIALLY IN DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES WHERE
90% OF SUCH DISASTERS
HAVE OCCURRED,
AND 99% OF
THEIR CASUALTIES.
THE TOTAL NUMBER OF
VICTIMS IS ESTIMATED TO BE
SOME 25 TIMES LARGER
THAN IN PAST CENTURIES.
IF WE COMPARE OLD
CHRONICLES WITH MODERN
RECORDS WE CAN CLEARLY SEE
THAT THE REGULARITY AND
INTENSITY OF SOME OF
THESE NATURAL DISASTERS
HAVE INCREASED
OVER PAST DECADES.
FLOODS CAUSED BY
DEFORESTATION;
HURRICANE DAMAGE
GETTING WORSE AND WORSE;
TIDAL WAVES CAUSING MORE
HAVOC THAN EVER BECAUSE OF
THE DISAPPEARANCE OF
MANGROVE SWAMPS AND REEFS;
AND FAMINE
DUE TO DROUGHT.
THESE ARE ALL DIRECTLY
RELATED TO THE CONSTANT
DETERIORATION OF
THE ENVIRONMENT.
IT'S NO COINCIDENCE THAT
THE IMMENSE MAJORITY OF
PEOPLE AFFECTED ARE,
AS WE HAVE SEEN,
RESIDENTS OF
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.
IN THE 90'S, MORE THAN
TWO BILLION INHABITANTS
OF THE THIRD WORLD
HAD BEEN AFFECTED
BY NATURAL DISASTERS.
MANGROVE SWAMPS ARE
TROPICAL FORESTS
LYING ALONG COASTAL AREAS
NEAR ESTUARIES AND REEFS
THAT FORM A
RICH ECOSYSTEM
ABOUNDING WITH A GREAT
DIVERSITY OF SPECIES.
THEY'RE VERY FRAGILE,
HOWEVER, AND PLAY A
CRUCIAL ROLE IN
PROTECTING LAND FALL
FROM THE EROSIVE
POWER AND FLOODING
INFLICTED BY HURRICANES
AND TIDAL WAVES.
IN THE LAST DECADES
THE PREDATORY ACTION
OF MANKIND HAS CAUSED
THE DISAPPEARANCE OF
50% OF THESE
SHORELINE FORESTS.
SOUTHEAST ASIA IS
A CLEAR EXAMPLE.
FOR SOME TWO DECADES NOW
THE BREEDING OF SHRIMP
AND FISH FARMS HAS
INCREASED ASTRONOMICALLY.
IN ORDER TO INSTALL THE
VAST SYSTEMS OF POOLS
THAT SHRIMP NEED TO
BREED IT'S NECESSARY TO
CUT DOWN
THE MANGROVES.
SHRIMP BREEDING WAS
TRADITIONALLY DONE BY
LOCAL COMMUNITIES ON A SMALL
SUBSISTENCE TYPE SCALE,
USUALLY IN RICE FIELDS
AND ALONG THE COAST
OF COUNTRIES SUCH
AS INDIA, THAILAND,
VIETNAM OR INDONESIA.
BUT NOW THAT HAS BEEN
REPLACED BY INDUSTRIAL
FISH FARMS, WHICH BESIDES
DESTROYING THE NATURAL
PROTECTIVE VEGETATION
ALONG THE COASTS,
EMPLOY PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
THAT ARE INCOMPATIBLE
WITH THE LARGER
ENVIRONMENT AT RISK.
DURING THE ASIAN
PACIFIC TSUNAMI IN 2004
THE MOST AFFECTED
COMMUNITIES WERE THOSE
THAT HAD DESTROYED THEIR
NATURAL COASTAL BARRIERS
BY ADHERING TO SUCH
DEVELOPMENT FRENZY.
THE MEKONG RIVER DELTA
IS THE MOST DENSELY
POPULATED CORNER
OF THE WORLD.
THIS LABYRINTH OF
CANALS AND RICE FIELDS
HAS ALWAYS
SUFFERED FLOODING.
THE WATERS RISE AND FALL TO
THE RHYTHM OF THE MONSOONS.
PEOPLE HAVE ALWAYS
KNOWN HOW TO
ADAPT TO THIS
ANNUAL PHENOMENON.
MOST OF THE INHABITANTS
LIVE ON RICE CROPS
SO IF THE MONSOONS DON'T
COME OR COME TOO LATE
OR WITHOUT NORMAL INTENSITY
AS IS THE CASE LATELY,
THE CONSEQUENCES
CAN BE FATAL.
IN THE HIGH AND LOW
STRETCHES OF THE RIVER,
FORESTS HAVE BEEN
OBLITERATED.
THESE FORESTS ONCE
STOPPED FLOODS.
NOW MUD AVALANCHES
DEVASTATE FIELDS
AND HERDS AND CROPS
ALONG WITH THEM.
IN SEPTEMBER 2000, HEAVY
RAINFALL CAUSED FLOODS
LIKE NEVER BEFORE
THROUGHOUT THE MEKONG AREA
AND AFFLUENT RIVERS.
THE WATERS FLOODED PARTS
OF NORTHERN THAILAND,
LAOS, CAMBODIA
AND VIETNAM.
HALF A MILLION PEOPLE HAD
TO ABANDON THEIR HOMES.
ANOTHER PROBLEM IN
THE MEKONG DELTA
IS THE DAMS UPSTREAM.
THE DROP IN FLOW HAS
CAUSED SEA WATER TO
ENTER THE DELTA AND
REACH THE RICE FIELDS.
BUT APART FROM THE
CONSEQUENCES AND EFFECTS
THAT CLIMATE CHANGE
HAS HAD UPON THE RAINY
SEASONS, IT HAS BEEN THE
INDISCRIMINATE FELLING
OF TREES THAT HAS BEEN THE
MOST DEVASTATING FACTOR
WITH RESPECT TO
LIFE AND DEATH
FOR THE INHABITANTS
OF THE MEKONG DELTA.
YET THIS IS HARDLY AN
EXCEPTION; RATHER,
IT'S THE NORM THAT
HAS REPEATED ITSELF
ALONG ALL THE GREAT
WATERWAYS ON THE PLANET.
AS RECENTLY AS THE
MID 20TH CENTURY
THE AMAZON BASIN WAS
AS LARGE AS AUSTRALIA.
OVER THE LAST 40 YEARS,
HOWEVER, ONE MILLION
SQUARE KILOMETERS OF
FOREST LAND HAVE BEEN LOST
- ABOUT A FIFTH OF ITS
TOTAL SURFACE AREA.
IN THE DRY SEASON AN
AVERAGE OF ABOUT 8,000
FIRES ARE SET FOR THE
PURPOSE OF CLEARING LAND
FOR RAISING CATTLE AND
CROPS BELONGING TO LARGE
LAND HOLDERS WHO WILL
EXPORT THEIR PRODUCTS
TO EUROPE, JAPAN AND
THE UNITED STATES.
LOCAL RESIDENTS ARE
FORCED OFF THESE LANDS
OR EXPLOITED ON THE
MASSIVE ESTATES.
AT BEST, THEY RECEIVE
MERE CRUMBS OF THE
TREMENDOUS PROFITS
THAT THE ANNIHILATION
OF THE AMAZONIAN
RAIN FOREST BRINGS.
THIS DESTRUCTIVE FRENZY
HASN'T PAUSED FOR A SECOND
EVER SINCE 1970.
UP UNTIL THEN IN ALL
RECORDED HISTORY
THE AMAZON HAD SUFFERED
ONLY ABOUT A 1% LOSS
OF ITS ORIGINAL SIZE.
BY 1978, HOWEVER,
ALMOST 4% OF THE TOTAL
SURFACE AREA OF THE
FOREST HAD BEEN DESTROYED.
AND THEN THE PROCESS
WENT INTO OVERDRIVE,
FOR JUST 10 YEARS
LATER OVER 400,000
SQUARE KILOMETERS HAD
BEEN SLASHED AND BURNED.
BY THE YEAR 2000, 15%
OF THE AMAZONIAN FOREST
HAD DISAPPEARED.
MOST OF THAT LAND
IS NOW DEDICATED TO
INDUSTRIAL SIZED FARMS
GROWING SOYBEANS.
BEGINNING IN THE YEAR
1900, ONE NATIVE TRIBE
HAD DISAPPEARED EACH
YEAR IN BRAZIL.
THEIR ENCOUNTER WITH
THE OUTER WORLD HAS
BROUGHT THEM IMPORTED
DISEASES, ALCOHOLISM, AND,
MOST DEVASTATINGLY, THE
LOSS OF LAND AND IDENTITY.
AND SO WHEN THE FOREST
DISAPPEARS, SO DO ITS
INHABITANTS, THE ORIGINAL
GENUINE RESIDENTS
OF THESE BEAUTIFUL YET
UNFORGIVING SPACES.
A DRAMATIC STORY INDEED IS
THAT OF THE KIOWA INDIANS.
SINCE 1987, 200 OF THEM
HAVE COMMITTED SUICIDE
BECAUSE THEY COULDN'T ENDURE
THE LOSS OF THEIR LAND.
AND IT'S NOT AN
ISOLATED CASE.
A LARGE SHARE OF BRAZILIAN
MAHOGANY COMES FROM
THE ILLEGAL FELLING OF
TREES ON NATIVE LANDS.
WITH THE MASS INVASION
OF PROSPECTORS,
20% OF THE 10,000
YANOMAMI INDIANS DIED,
MAINLY DUE
TO MALARIA.
AT THE WORST STAGE OF THE
INVASION, THERE WERE NO
CHILDREN UNDER THE AGE
OF TWO IN THE VILLAGES.
THE CONSEQUENCES OF THIS
LAWLESS EXPLOITATION OF
THE RAIN FOREST ARE VERY
SERIOUS AND NOT ONLY FOR
BRAZIL OR EVEN FOR THE
REST OF THE COUNTRIES
IN THE AMAZONIAN BASIN, BUT
FOR THE ENTIRE HUMAN RACE.
ILLEGAL LOGGING AND THE
BURNING OF TROPICAL
FORESTS CAUSE 35% OF THE
CARBON MONOXIDE RELEASED
TO RETURN TO
THE ATMOSPHERE.
THIS IS ONE OF THE
CENTRAL CAUSES OF THE
DETERIORATION OF
THE OZONE LAYER
AND THE PLANET'S
CLIMATE CHANGE.
MOREOVER, FORESTS ARE
IMPORTANT WATER REGULATORS.
THE STRUCTURES OF
TREE ROOTS ACT AS
NATURAL SPONGES,
ABSORBING WATER
AND LIBERATING
IT SLOWLY THROUGHOUT THE YEAR.
THIS WAY THEY REGULATE
RIVERS, REPLACE
UNDERGROUND WATER, HELP
REDUCE SOIL EROSION,
AND FREE HUMIDITY
AS IT IS NEEDED
INTO THE ATMOSPHERE.
IF THE FORESTS ARE CUT
DOWN, SEDIMENTATION
OBSTRUCTS WATERWAYS,
FLOODS BECOME INEVITABLY
MORE FREQUENT, UNDERGROUND
WATER RESERVES DISAPPEAR
AND OUR WEATHER CHANGES.
THE EXCESSIVE EXTRACTION
AND REROUTING OF WATER
HAS ALSO AFFECTED
INHABITANTS
OF AREAS AROUND
THE NILE RIVER.
THEY HAVE SEEN HOW THE
FLUCTUATIONS OF THE RIVER
NO LONGER MEET THEIR
IRRIGATIONAL NEEDS
AND MANY HAVE HAD
TO EMIGRATE
TO BIG CITIES
SUCH AS CAIRO.
OVER THE PAST FEW DECADES,
THOUSANDS OF AFRICANS
FROM ALL OVER THE
CONTINENT HAVE ABANDONED
RURAL AREAS AND SETTLED
IN CITIES THAT WERE
UNPREPARED FOR THAT
KIND OF EXODUS.
NATURALLY, VULNERABILITY
INCREASES WITH POVERTY.
IN THE ABSENCE OF RULES
THAT COULD ORGANIZE THE
LAND AND OVERCOME THE LACK
OF CERTAIN RESOURCES,
PEOPLE FIND THEMSELVES
OBLIGED TO LIVE IN AREAS
AT THEIR OWN RISK.
THEY SETTLE PLAINS AND
FLATLANDS NEAR ESTUARIES
THAT ARE SURE TO BE
FLOODED OR PERILOUSLY
PRECARIOUS AREAS PRONE TO
MUDSLIDES OR ROCKSLIDES.
ACCORDING TO THE UNITED
NATIONS, AT THE BEGINNING
OF THE 21ST CENTURY, 250
MILLION PEOPLE WERE LIVING
IN UNDEVELOPED COUNTRIES
WHERE THEY WERE EXPOSED TO
FLOODING, DROUGHTS,
EARTHQUAKES OR HURRICANES
AND AS A CONSEQUENCE
THEY WOULD BE FORCED TO
CONSIDER THE POSSIBILITY
OF ABANDONING THEIR
TRADITIONAL TOWNSHIPS
AND MOVING TO OTHER
VULNERABLE AREAS USUALLY
CHARACTERIZED BY
GENERALLY LAWLESS
CONDITIONS.
THIS NUMBER HAD INCREASED
FROM 1990 ACTUALLY.
BACK THEN IT
WAS ONLY 53,000.
IT HAD DOUBLED BY 2003.
AND THEN IN 2004
WHEN A TSUNAMI HIT,
SOME 200,000
PEOPLE DIED.
TURNING THE EARTH INTO
A DUMP HAS A PRICE.
THE CONSEQUENCES ARE
SERIOUS AND MANY.
ONE OF THEM IS
ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE -
THE EXTINCTION OF ANIMAL
AND PLANT SPECIES.
A WORLD HERITAGE WHOSE
PRESERVATION IS NOT MERELY
THE WHIM OF SOME
ECOLOGIST OR NATURALIST
BUT A FIRST CLASS
ECONOMIC NECESSITY.
90% OF THE SPECIES IN
DANGER OF EXTINCTION
LIVE IN THIRD
WORLD COUNTRIES.
THEIR UNWITTING ROLE OF
PARTICIPATING IN THE
GLOBAL DUMP IS ENDANGERING
DIVERSITY, THE FUTURE OF
SCIENTIFIC ADVANCEMENT,
AND THE DAILY ECONOMY
OF THOUSANDS OF
LOCAL COMMUNITIES.
MANAUS IS KNOWN AS THE
GREAT CITY OF THE AMAZON.
IT THRIVED ON THE NEEDS
OF THE RUBBER INDUSTRY
THROUGHOUT THE 20TH
CENTURY AND IS NOW HOME
TO OVER ONE MILLION
INHABITANTS.
ITS DEVELOPMENT HAS BEEN
SO QUICK AND UNREGULATED,
AROUND 90% OF ALL
ITS ANIMAL SPECIES
HAVE DISAPPEARED.
FISHING, ONCE PLENTIFUL,
IS NOW SCARCE.
ITS MAIN ACTIVITY IS
BRINGING RESOURCES
IN FROM THE FOREST.
EACH YEAR 200,000
TONS OF FISH
COME OUT OF THE
AMAZONIAN BASIN.
AT THE MARKET IN MANAUS
MORE THAN 40 VARIETIES
OF AMAZONIAN
FISH ARE SOLD.
THE MOST VALUED IS
PERHAPS THE PIRARUCU.
AS LARGE AS A SHARK,
THIS FISH CAN WEIGH
UP TO 200 KILOS.
IT'S A TRUE GIANT THAT
IS EVER MORE THREATENED
BY INDUSTRIAL
STYLE FISHING.
NOT LONG AGO THERE
WERE 15 TIMES MORE
FRESH WATER SPECIES
IN THE AMAZON
THAN THOSE IN ALL THE
EUROPEAN WATERS COMBINED.
RECENT STUDIES SHOW THAT
AREAS THAT ONCE SUPPORTED
BETWEEN 1,200
AND 1,500 SPECIES
NOW ARE HOME
TO ABOUT 400.
THIS SERIOUSLY AFFECTS
NATIVE POPULATIONS.
OF THE 140 MILLION
INHABITANTS IN BRAZIL,
20 MILLION LIVE IN THE
AMAZONIAN BASIN AND ARE
THREATENED BY THE DAMAGE
TO THE RAIN FOREST.
SOME LIVE IN BIG CITIES
LIKE MANAUS WHILE OTHERS
LIVE IN ISOLATION IN
NATIVE COMMUNITIES.
THERE ARE 200,000
AMAZONIAN NATIVES
THAT HAVE SEEN AND STILL
SEE THEIR FUTURE IN
GRAVE DANGER BECAUSE OF
THE SEEMINGLY UNSTOPPABLE
ADVANCE OF MODERN
DEVELOPMENT - FROM WHICH
THEY RECEIVE ONLY MIRRORS
AND COLORED BEADS.
ALONG THE WEST COAST OF
AFRICA, AT ROUGHLY THE
SAME LONGITUDE AS THE
AFRICAN SAHEL, WE FIND
ONE OF THE RICHEST PLACES
IN THE WORLD FOR FISHING.
HOWEVER, OVER THE PAST
THREE DECADES ENORMOUS
FISH FARM BOATS WITH
JAPANESE, RUSSIAN OR
SPANISH FLAGS HAVE
EXHAUSTED THESE WATERS
WITH THE LOCAL
GOVERNMENT'S COMPLICITY.
AT THE SAME TIME, ALL
DOWN THIS COASTLINE
THOUSANDS OF MEN
MAKE A LIVING OUT OF
TRADITIONAL FISHING IN
DIRECT COMPETITION WITH
THE ENORMOUS
INTERNATIONAL VESSELS.
THE LOCAL FISHERMEN LOOK
FOR SARDINES AND MULLETS.
GROUPERS, GILTHEAD
BREAMS, OR SQUIDS
ARE FOR THE
FISH FARM VESSELS.
BUT IN THE QUEST
FOR THESE PRODUCTS,
THE LATTER DEVASTATE
EVERYTHING THEY COME ACROSS.
SPECIES THAT ONCE THRIVED
ON THE MAURITANIAN BANK,
JUST LIKE IN MANY OTHERS,
ARE SEVERELY DEPLETED.
WHEN THIS HAPPENS, THE BIG
INTERNATIONALS GO LOOK FOR
OTHER FISHING GROUNDS TO
DEPLETE WHILE TRADITIONAL
FISHERMEN END UP HAVING
TO MIGRATE TO EUROPE.
♪
NOT ONLY
ON FIRM GROUND
THE RUBBISH AND
DAMAGE ACCUMULATES;
THE SEA ALSO HAS
HAD HER SHARE.
THE SEA BED WAS ALWAYS
GENEROUS TO MANKIND,
WHO IN TURN GENERALLY
RESPONDED WITH SINCERE
GRATITUDE - UNTIL
THE 20TH CENTURY,
THAT IS, WHEN
INDUSTRIAL FISHING
MADE ITS APPEARANCE
ON THE GLOBAL SCENE.
FROM THAT MOMENT ON,
OVER EXPLOITATION
HAS BEEN THE NORM.
AND NOW OVER HALF OF ALL
COMMERCIAL FISH SPECIES
ARE IN DANGER
OF EXTINCTION.
JUST A QUARTER OF ALL
THE SEA'S RESOURCES
ARE SAFE FROM THIS
TYPE OF DEVASTATION.
NATURAL DISASTERS CAUSED
BY CHEMICAL PRODUCTS
HAVE INCREASED
SINCE 1960.
ONE OF THE GREATEST
SOURCES IS DUMPING.
BETWEEN ONE ONE-THOUSANDTH
AND TWO THOUSANDTHS OF THE
WORLD'S OIL PRODUCTION
ENDS UP IN THE SEA.
SHIPPING ACCIDENTS,
PETROL STATIONS,
AND REFINERIES DUMP
ALMOST THREE MILLION
TONS OF OIL INTO
THE WATER EACH YEAR
CAUSING IRREVERSIBLE
DAMAGE TO THE ENVIRONMENT.
THE TRANSFORMATION OF
TROPICAL RAIN FORESTS
INTO CULTIVATED FIELDS,
OF RIVER BANKS
INTO CAR PARKS,
OR SEA BEDS
INTO DESERTS,
OBVIOUSLY HAVE SERIOUS
CONSEQUENCES FOR ALL OF US
- NOT ONLY FOR
THOSE COMMUNITIES
THAT SUFFER
MOST DIRECTLY.
IT IS CALCULATED THAT
HUMAN BEINGS HAVE
INCREASED THE RATE OF
ANIMAL SPECIES EXTINCTION
BY UP TO 100,000%
OF ITS NATURAL PACE.
WE HAVE DESTROYED, OR
ARE IN THE PROCESS OF
DESTROYING, 12% OF ALL
BIRDS, 25% OF MAMMALS,
AND 32% OF
ALL AMPHIBIANS.
IF WE DON'T
STOP THIS PROCESS
AND ACHIEVE
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
WE WILL SOON LOSE CONTROL
OVER OUR OWN SURVIVAL.
THERE'S NO CONSENSUS
ON THE CAUSES OF
THE EARTH'S RECENT
CLIMATIC CHANGES.
IT'S CERTAINLY TRUE THAT
THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT
ISN'T THE RESULT
EXCLUSIVELY
OF HUMAN ACTIVITY.
IN FACT, WITHOUT IT THE
AVERAGE TEMPERATURE
OF THE EARTH WOULD BE
18 DEGREES BELOW ZERO.
OUR ATMOSPHERE NEEDS
CARBON DIOXIDE, CO2,
TO REGULATE GLOBAL
TEMPERATURE.
HOWEVER, THERE IS
SCIENTIFIC CONSENSUS
REGARDING THE ARTIFICIAL
INCREASES IN CERTAIN
FACTORS THAT CAUSE
TEMPERATURE INCREASES
AND DISORDERS IN
NATURAL WEATHER CYCLES.
AND THIS IS EXACTLY
WHAT IS HAPPENING.
GLOBAL CLIMATE IS BEING
ALTERED AS A CONSEQUENCE
OF THE INCREASED
CONCENTRATION
OF GREENHOUSE GASES.
THESE GASES WILL INCREASE
THE PLANET'S TEMPERATURE
BETWEEN 1.5 AND 4.5
DEGREES CELSIUS.
THE CONSEQUENCES
CAN ALREADY BE SEEN:
FLOODING OF COASTAL AREAS
AND CITIES, FIERCER STORMS,
THE EXTINCTION OF
COUNTLESS ANIMAL
AND PLANT SPECIES,
MORE DROUGHTS.
MANKIND'S ENERGY USE HAS
BEEN 16 TIMES GREATER
IN THE 20TH CENTURY THAN
BEFORE, AND 80% OF THIS
ENERGY HAS BEEN OBTAINED
FROM FOSSIL FUEL, COAL AND
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS WHICH
HAS BEEN RESPONSIBLE FOR
A 25% INCREASE OF CO2
IN THE ATMOSPHERE
OVER THE LAST CENTURY.
WE ARE CREATING A WORLD
THAT IS BASED ON
BIG CITIES, A WORLD OF
CONCRETE AND CEMENT.
CITIES CONTAMINATED BY
SMOKE, DESIGNED FOR HUSTLE
AND BUSTLE, FOR THE WASTE
OF RESOURCES AND ENERGY.
WE HAVE CREATED
AN URBAN WORLD
WITH AN UNSUSTAINABLE
PRODUCTION SYSTEM
AND LEVELS OF CONSUMPTION,
AND IT IS UNSUSTAINABLE
BECAUSE OF TWO
BASIC PRINCIPLES.
IT'S BASED ON THE
INDISCRIMINATE USE OF
SOURCE MATERIALS AND
IS CONCEIVED IN A WAY
THAT TWO-THIRDS OF
THE HUMAN RACE
CAN NEVER ACCESS
THE PROFITS.
IF WE CONSIDER THE FACT
THAT FIRST WORLD COUNTRIES
CONSUME 90% OF THE
DIRTY ENERGY PRODUCED
AND THAT THIRD
WORLD COUNTRIES
SUFFER THE WORST
CONSEQUENCES OF THE
NATURAL DISASTERS
CAUSED BY CLIMATE CHANGE,
WE FIND OURSELVES
BACK AT SQUARE ONE.
IS THE ENVIRONMENTAL
DAMAGE SUFFERED
THE SAME WAY IN MALI
AS IN CHICAGO?
OBVIOUSLY, IT'S NOT.
ONE OF THE TANGIBLE
CONSEQUENCES OF CLIMATE
CHANGE IS THE DIZZYING
ADVANCE OF THE DESERT.
THIS OASIS ONCE STRETCHED
OVER TWICE THE AREA
IT DOES NOW AND THAT WAS
JUST A FEW YEARS AGO.
NOT LONG FROM NOW IT
PROBABLY WON'T EVEN EXIST.
IN THE DESERT AND
SURROUNDING AREAS
THERE HAVE ALWAYS BEEN
DROUGHTS AND FAMINE
BUT THEY WERE OCCASIONAL
AND PREDICTABLE.
OVER THE PAST 30 YEARS THE
SLOW BUT UNSTOPPABLE RISE
IN GLOBAL TEMPERATURES
HAS DRIED UP WELLS
AND DEVASTATED
GRAZING AREAS
ON THE FRINGES
OF OUR DESERTS.
NOMADIC PEOPLES HAVE
HAD TO ABANDON THEIR
TRADITIONAL WAYS OF LIFE
AND MOVE TO CITIES LIKE
BAMAKO OR NIENA.
THERE MIGHT BE OTHER
CAUSES TO TAKE INTO
ACCOUNT BUT HARDLY ANYONE
NOW DOUBTS THAT OUR MODEL
OF DEVELOPMENT HAS AIDED
IN THE INCREASED RATE OF
FLOODS AND DROUGHTS OVER
THE LAST FEW DECADES.
IN INDONESIA, TREMENDOUS
SPATES OF RAINFALL
HAVE ADDED TO
DEFORESTATION AND
CAUSED SIGNIFICANT
LOSS OF LAND.
MANY INHABITANTS
OF BORNEO AND SUMATRA
HAVE LEFT THE JUNGLE TO
CROWD TOGETHER IN CITIES
SUCH AS JOYAKARTA WHERE
THEY FESTER WITHOUT
HARDLY EVEN THE MOST
BASIC OF SERVICES.
IT'S A REALITY WE CANNOT
JUST CLOSE OUR EYES TO,
FROM WHICH WE CAN
SIMPLY WALK AWAY.
THE POOR SUFFER THE
CONSEQUENCES MANIFEST
IN A NATURAL SYSTEM
SO PROFITS MAY BE
ACCUMULATED IN FIRST
WORLD COUNTRIES.
THE LARGE SCALE
DEFORESTATION PROJECTS
OCCURRING IN PLACES SUCH
AS THE AMAZON OR INDONESIA
START IN SOME SENSES
WITH THE DEMAND FOR
MEAT OR PAPER
IN OTHER PLACES
FAR REMOVED FROM
THOSE FORESTS.
THE NEGATIVE IMPACT
OF CLIMATE CHANGE
IS DISPROPORTIONATELY
AFFECTING THE RICH
AND THE POOR,
BUT NOT ALIKE.
AND WE'D BE DECEIVING
OURSELVES IF WE THOUGHT
THAT BY SIMPLY MOVING
THE RISKS OUT OF OUR OWN
BACK YARDS AND
INTO SOMEBODY ELSE'S
WE COULD BE FREE
OF THE CONSEQUENCES.
IN A GLOBALIZED WORLD,
DAMAGE TO THE ENVIRONMENT
IS ALSO GLOBAL.
THE CURRENT PRODUCTION
AND DEVELOPMENT SYSTEM
IS SIMPLY UNVIABLE OVER
THE MIDDLE AND LONG TERM.
CURRENT TECHNOLOGY COULD
ALLOW US TO PRODUCE AND
CONSUME IN A SUSTAINABLE
WAY BY CALCULATING RISKS
AND AVOIDING TURNING 80%
OF MANKIND'S PRODUCTION
INTO A WASTE DUMP FOR
THE REST OF THE WORLD.
APPLYING THE MODEL,
HOWEVER, CHANGING PEOPLES'
HABITS ISN'T SIMPLY AN
OPTION, IT'S A NECESSITY.
AND THE SOONER WE START
THE SMALLER THE PRICE
THAT FUTURE GENERATIONS
WILL HAVE TO PAY
FOR OUR LACK OF
RESPONSIBILITY.